# Cross-platform data analysis reveals a generic gene expression signature for microsatellite instability in colorectal cancer.

The dysfunction of the DNA mismatch repair system results in microsatellite instability (MSI). MSI plays a central role in the development of multiple human cancers. In colon cancer, despite being associated with resistance to 5-fluorouracil treatment, MSI is a favourable prognostic marker. In gastric and endometrial cancers, its prognostic value is not so well established. Nevertheless, recognising the MSI tumours may be important for predicting the therapeutic effect of immune checkpoint inhibitors. Several gene expression signatures were trained on microarray datasets to understand the regulatory mechanisms underlying microsatellite instability in colorectal cancer. A wealth of expression data already exist in the form of microarray datasets. However, the RNA-seq has become a routine for transcriptome analysis. 

A new MSI gene-expression signature presented here is the first to be valid across two different platforms – microarrays and RNA-seq. In the case of colon cancer, its estimated performance was (i) AUC = 0.94, 95% CI = (0.90 – 0.97) on RNA-seq and (ii) AUC = 0.95, 95% CI = (0.92 – 0.97) on microarray. The 25-gene expression signature was also validated in two independent microarray colon cancer datasets. Despite being derived from colorectal cancer, the signature maintained a good performance on RNA-seq and microarray gastric cancer datasets (AUC = 0.90, 95% CI = (0.85 – 0.94) and AUC = 0.83, 95% CI = (0.69 – 0.97), respectively). Furthermore, this classifier retained high concordance even when classifying RNA-seq endometrial cancers (AUC = 0.71, 95% CI = (0.62 – 0.81). These results indicate that the new signature was able to capture the common gene activation patterns in the colon, gastric and endometrial cancers suggesting that the development of a common expression-based cross-platform test is feasible.
